Guerry Franchione a is one of the most
prominent theoreticians
of animal rights and the vegan movement
today this video is not offering a
critique that you have heard before if
you have been reading his work reading
critiques of his work
looking up debates he's already provided
to the world via a radio via YouTube by
other platforms that I can tell you this
is not telling you something you have
already heard a half dozen times part of
what makes Francie ohne a distinct and
memorable voice in the vegan and animal
rights world is that many decades ago he
broke away from Petta
People for the Ethical Treatment of
Animals and his engagement the issues
has partly been framed as a critique of
Pettus methods it's eddie'll its
ideology the limitations of what it does
and I'm sure for many people especially
in France he on his own generation who
discovered veganism as adults who first
had a dalliance with so-called animal
welfare scauses
and who gradually progressed from shall
we say softcore to hardcore veganism
I'm sure his story is a sympathetic one
and the critiques he offers are both
useful and also have some real emotional
resonance because they'll reflect issues
many people will wrestle with themselves
there are people who you know at age
thirty were still involved with trying
to get puppies out of the pound but
we're still eating beef and then made a
gradual progression from you know to not
eating red meat but still eating cheese
and taking up a bunch of kind of halfway
positions and only very gradually coming
to the set of realizations that Gary
fraccion a presents to you fully
packaged as being look either this is a
fundamental question of principle either
this is a fundamental question of animal
rights or it is not and he's inviting
you to take that leap to engage with
animal rights seriously become fully
vegan and support the complete abolition
of animal exploitation an abolition is
definitely his key word let me tell you
now in this video I'm gonna tell you why
I think everyone is wrong even though I
am myself a vegan and I think I could be
described as an abolitionist vegan um
in seeing that he is wrong I want to
start by clarifying does not mean that
his work is completely invalid that it's
of no value to anyone that it should be
discarded political science and
economics are really fundamentally
different from the pure Sciences in that
we very often have theories that are
valid within limits we have theories in
the social sciences that are valid and
useful in reference to some examples and
not others that are useful in some
contexts and not others
you can have a theory in economics that
explains inflation in highly
industrialized countries and yet it is
not useful at all when you're looking at
inflation in a small third-world country
that does not have industry and that
perhaps isn't connected to other markets
that may sound like a shallow
distraction to you but actually it's
kind of a profound point in physics
either you have a theory of gravity or
you don't I'm not allowed to give you a
theory of gravity that only makes sense
here on earth and then to say well you
know my calculations that make sense on
earth but for some reason they don't
make sense on the moon so you just
forget about it on the moon different
rules apply no you have to work
systematically figure out the principles
of gravity in a way that will both
explain what we observe here on earth
and what we observe on the moon in a way
that's consistent reducible to one rule
well the social sciences are not like
that or at least specifically political
science and economics are definitely not
like that I would note that anarchism is
an example of a whole set of theories
that often work as a critique of a
particular issue of a particular set of
issues but then when you take them
outside of their comfort zone and you
apply them to other situations and the
questions they become irrelevant they
become incoherent or they become false
if regarded as a set of factual claims I
have never seen a serious anarchist
attempt to deal with sewage treatment
how are we going to have sewage
treatment without laws how are we going
to manage wastewater being put into a
lake that millions of people live around
in an industrialized Society
with factories that have hazardous waste
with sewage treatment plants and with
people relying on that same lake for the
drinking water those are difficult
questions but their questions
governments have to deal with every day
and while an anarchist or libertarian
may be sort of working to their own
strengths theoretically when they're
addressing government corruption
government incompetence police brutality
or a number of other themes suddenly
when you want to talk about sewage
treatments this whole approach seems to
fall apart so this is in effect what I
have to say about Gary Franchione a that
he has devised an approach that has some
strengths and some weaknesses that is
valid in reference to some examples and
not others francy on his approach the
distinctive crucial aspect is his claim
that we must recognize that all animals
have the rights not to be property so
the sort of route most basic right is in
his words a negative right it's not the
right to do something it's not even the
right to live it's the right not to be
the property of a human being and
therefore not to be exploited for human
use for human consumption etc if we
accept this principle and it is a matter
of principle we must therefore abolish
the whole institutional structure of the
meat industry and in general all of his
strengths are in addressing factory
farming and in this critique of what he
calls single issue causes now this
approach has some strengths he is quite
strong in pointing out the ways in which
there are subtle hypocrisy within animal
welfare ISM he is quite strong and
pointing out the ways in which a
campaign from an animal rights group can
end up glorifying or encouraging a meat
corporation iterate what do you want me
to say here a slaughterhouse owning
corporation or a food a purveyor of meat
like McDonald's by rubber-stamping by
endorsing by approving of
one set of animal sporting practices
over another because they caused 10
percent less suffering or give chickens
ten percent more space in their cages to
be sure he has a set of valid and
interesting and provocative points here
and I think that even most people who
disagree with frenzy only agree that
these are issues really worth thinking
about now I would say the weaknesses
become evident though when we switch the
flame frame of reference to habitat
conservation and wild animals that I
find in general he almost never mentions
so part and parcel this approach Gary
Francie on his approach is the refusal
to break down and address single issue
causes and just how bitter he is about
that comes out his hotline debates so
for example he is vociferous in his
disavowal of the banning of foie gras he
hates this with a passion the idea that
you know exploiting animals in one
particular way should be targeted and
addressed in restaurants or in food
production that you know production of
foie gras is more cruel than just the
production of duck meat pure and simple
and that people should be trying to pass
a law to ban foie gras in particular
well now again he raises some
interesting points and questions you
know why do we care about this one
method of feeding and killing ducks as
opposed to other methods of feeding and
killing ducks chickens cows oysters
turkeys or monkeys or anything else okay
interesting critique I used to live in a
small poverty-stricken country in
Southeast Asia called Laos we had a
situation there where I believe a
species of indigenous dolphin was down
to just seven members I could be
misremembering the number but it was an
incredibly small number of this species
of dolphin remained alive now if you
want to save that species from
extinction you are looking at a single
issue cause of exactly the type that
Fran Sione hates
and one of the reasons he hates them is
that these single-issue causes do draw
you into negotiations with you
compromises with - discussions with
people who profit from animal
exploitation
now although he has some interesting
observations there I have some
interesting observations of my own - um
yes if you want to save those dolphins
the Mekong River dolphins the last few
families of dolphins the last few
breeding pairs you are going to have to
enter into complex arrangements with
fishermen yes evil fishermen people who
kill and eat fish every day for a living
that's exactly who you need to make a
compromise with and you don't have the
luxury of just making it illegal to
catch fish entirely which is exactly
Gary France a ones abolitionist
approach was okay well ban fishing
entirely it's all bad it's all killing
animals well we got a problem here and
now with one particular species and
right now in whatever 2016 as soon as
possible
if radical but practicable I don't just
say practical but practicable action is
not taken then there's no chance for the
species to survive and yeah that is a
single issue cause and it's a single
issue cause that will lead you to
perhaps not only make compromises with
fishermen trying to sort out where they
can fish and with what methods trying to
ensure enough habitat is reserved for
the dolphins and the dolphins are
getting enough of the species they need
to eat etc etc all these peculiar dotted
lines in a map you know crow guess what
you're also probably going to be making
compromises with corrupt government
officials
you're probably gonna making compromises
with exactly the people who themselves
have been exploiting these animals and
driven driving them to the edge of
extinction people whose whole economic
existence is probably centered on the
exploitation of this same stretch of
river where you're now trying to save
the last few dolphins
francy only definitely opposes ever
making animals into legal property but
very often with animals in the wild
and indeed this even happens sometimes
with animals and laboratories when
you're trying to liberate animals that
exploited for scientific research what
is necessary is precisely to have
someone who gives a voice to the
voiceless a wild animal or an animal
that has been discarded by a lab that
has no owner has no voice and again this
is in the year 2016 we're not talking
about a science fiction world in the
future we're not talking about an ideal
world that vegans created and some
parallel universe if you're down to say
the last 20 wild elephants living in a
troop somewhere and some little patch of
jungle they have nobody to advocate for
them they have nobody represent their
interest say in conflicts with the
government say in conflicts with a
logging company very often one of the
things you try to do is to declare those
elephants the property of the state the
property of the king the property of
some millionaire patrons someone like
Bill Gates if someone can intervene and
actually claim the animals as their
property then they can very often
exercise protections for those animals
because there is now a lawyer and there
is now a bank account connected to those
animals and I have seen that happen with
personhood cases for apes people were a
saying look you've got an ape that has
some background whether it's a former
circus performer or a former victim of
gruesome experiments and laboratories
they look we need to create a legal
status for this ape for this elephant or
what have you so that it can be legally
defended even if it is being defended
simply in it's right to sit alone in the
forest and forage for food and a daily
basis okay I think I've said enough
because I'm trying to keep this video
somewhat brief and snappy um I do not
think that the themes and issues that
Gary franciotti is raising are
meaningless I think he has created a
number of very interesting and
worthwhile debates and I would assume
that several decades ago people found
what he had to say quite shocking in
contrast to what was the accepted norm
surrounding animal welfare ISM groups
like pata People for the Ethical
Treatment of Animals and what-have-you
in the year 2016 it's probably a very
positive thing that so many of France
Sione's views now seem outmoded and
old-fashioned I think that's a sign of
progress as always one of the practical
issues I raised is the the comparison to
cigarette smoking the solution for
tobacco and cigarette smoking has not
been to simply declare that nicotine is
illegal that the tobacco plant is
illegal and to make cigarettes disappear
no matter where you are watching this
video from please try to imagine just
how short a distance you would have to
walk to buy a pack of cigarettes if you
wanted to and if you're watching this
video in China Greece or Italy you may
be watching in a society where people
still smoke to a remarkable extent but
we've entered into a transitional period
with cigarette smoking even though it is
legal even though it is socially
acceptable to some extent in some
contexts when someone lights up a
cigarette the most common reaction for
the people around them is man do you
really have to do you really have to
smoke it is simply perceived right now
in 2016 as a bad thing parents do not
want their children to smoke even if the
parent smokes cigarettes themselves
think about what a different world we
would live in if we lived in a world
where parents didn't want their children
to eat bacon even if they ate bacon
themselves we're a long way away even
from hitting that transitional stage
even from being in a society where meat
is perceived as problematic enough for
people to say man do you really need to
eat meat but we can get there and we're
not going to get there by taking this
impossible
science fiction shortcut to living in a
world where we can simply declare oh
nobody can eat any fish fish are illegal
they're for saving the dolphins isn't a
problem no no in the next century in the
next 10 years we'll have a plurality of
genuinely valid single issue causes
attached to veganism and if you're a
vegan
there is no legitimate reason why you
can't be a vegan and can't at the same
time also be committed to helping a
particular population of dolphins in a
particular body of water or helping a
particular ape in a particular cage in a
particular lab dealing with single-issue
causes remains meaningful and it's good
our main meaningful week to week and
month to month because ultimately we're
all human beings we all have only two
hands to work with two eyes and 24 hours
in the day so yes you will engage with
single-issue causes and particular
single-issue causes whether it's a
particular ape a particular cow etc they
are not all evil in the way that Gary
Fran Sione claims they are on the basis
of examples because he selects good
examples he selects examples of some
single issue causes that you should
consider evil because they draw vegans
in to fundamentally unethical
compromises